* **The way Java Works** The goal is to write one application and have it work on whatever device you want. We wll type a source code file, compile it using the **javac** compiler, then run the compiled **bytecode** on a **Java virtual machine**. 

* The following steps are involved:
  * **Source**: Write your source code, save it as a java file of class name. For example Party.java.
  * **Compile**: Compile the Party.java file by running javac compiler - the compiler application. On successful compilation, you will get a document called Party.class. This compiler generated document contains the bytecode.
  * **Virtual Machines**: Run the program by starting Java Virtual Machine with the Party.class. JVM will transform the program into low level instructions, something the underlying OS can understand, which runs the program.
  
  * When the JVM starts running, it looks for a class you give it at the command line. It then starts looking for the ```main``` method. It runs everything in this ```main``` method. 
    ```java
  public static void main(String[] args){
  
  }
  ```
  
  * Java only starts running a program with the specific **public static void main(String[] args)** signature, It's how Java can tell the difference between someone else's main() and the one true main().
  
 * String[] args is a collection of Strings, separated by a space, which can be typed into the program on the terminal. More times than not, the beginner isn't going to use this variable, but it's always there just in case.
 
* Theres a reason JAVA was designed to use bytecode compiler. If java was purely interpreted language, where at runtime the virtutal machine had to translate straight-from-the-text editor source code, a java program would run at a very slow pace. 

