## Contents
  * [Strings](#strings)
    * [String Literal vs String Object](#string-literal-vs-string-object)
  
##Strings

* A Java String is an **object** of the class ```java.lang```.
* Java's String is designed to be **in between a primitive and a class**, for performance reasons.
* Strings receive this special treatment because they are used frequently in a program.Hence efficiency in terms of computation and storage is crucial.
* The designers of Java decided to retain primitive types in an object-oriented language, instead of making everything an object, so as to improve the performance of the language. Primitives are stored in the **call stack**, which require less storage spaces and are cheaper to manipulate. On the other hand, objects are stored in the **program heap**, which require complex memory management and more storage spaces.

### String Literal vs String Object

* A string can be constructed by either: 
  * directly assigning a string literal to a String reference - *just like a primitive*, or
  * via the "new" operator and constructor, *similar to any other classes* . However, this is not commonly-used and is not recommended.
Example:
```java
String str1 = "Java is Hot";           // Implicit construction via string literal
String str2 = new String("I'm cool");  // Explicit construction via new
```
* In the first statement, ```str1``` is declared as a String reference and initialized with a string literal ```"Java is Hot"```. In the second statement, ```str2``` is declared as a String reference. Here  a new memory location is created which contains ```"I'm cool"```, and the reference to this memory location is provided to ```str2```.

* String literals are stored in a *common pool*. This facilitates sharing of storage for strings with the same contents to conserve storage. String objects allocated via new operator are stored in the heap, and there is no sharing of storage for the same contents.

Lets have a look at following example:

```java
String s1 = "Hello";              // String literal
String s2 = "Hello";              // String literal
String s3 = s1;                   // same reference
String s4 = new String("Hello");  // String object
String s5 = new String("Hello");  // String object
```


