## Contents
* [TLDR](#tldr)
* [Immutable Classes](#immutable-classes)
    * [What is an immutable object](#what-is-an-immutable-object)
    * [Differences between final and immutability](#differences-between-final-and-immutability)
    * [How to make an object immutable](#how-to-make-an-object-immutable)
    * [Advantages of Immutability](#advantages-of-immutability)
    
 ## TLDR
 * Immutable classes are those classes whose objects' state can not be changed once they are constructed.
 * The accepted practice is, whenever the objects value needs to be modified we can make a new copy of object with changes and return it.
 * Immutable objects are thread-safe in concurrent enviornment. Since the value of objects can not be changed once created, there are no locking issues. Whenever the state of the object is modified by a thread, it will have a new instance of the object. 
 * String and other wrapper classes like Boolean, Byte, Short are all immutable.
 * When a variable is made final, the reference of object is stores can not be changed, but the state of the object can still be changed by the same variable or any other variable which has a reference to the same object. But when we have an immutable object, the state of object can not be changed at all.
 
    
 ## What is an immutable object
  
 * An immutable object is one that will not change state after it is instantiated.
 * An object is immutable if its state cannot change after construction. Immutable objects don’t expose any way for other objects to modify their state; the object’s fields are initialized only once inside the constructor and never change again.
 * An immutable object can’t be modified after it has been created. When a new value is needed, the accepted practice is to make a copy of the object that has the new value.
 * In Java, all the wrapper classes (like String, Boolean, Byte, Short) and String class is immutable.
 * This is useful as it means you can pass references to the object around, without worrying that someone else is going to change its contents. Especially when dealing with **concurrency** , there are no locking issues with objects that never change. With immutable classes, states are never modified; every modification of a state results in a new instance, hence each thread would use a different instance and developers wouldn’t worry about concurrent modifications.
 
 * ```String``` is the most popular immutable class in Java. Once initialized its value cannot be modified. Operations like ```trim(), substring(), replace()``` always return a new instance and don’t affect the current instance. Lets check this:
 
 ```java
 public class StringTest {

    public static void main(String[] args) {

        String str1 = "       Hello World";
        str1.trim();
        System.out.println("String 1:" + str1);
        
    }
}
```
OUTPUT: 
```java
String 1:       Hello World
```

* This happens, because String is immutable, whenever change like this occurs, a new object is created. But ```str1``` is still pointing to the previous object. That is why we use ```trim()``` and other methods which return String like this: 

```java
public class StringTest {

    public static void main(String[] args) {

        String str1 = "       Hello World";
        str1 = str1.trim();
        System.out.println("String 1:" + str1);

    }
}
```

OUTPUT: 
```java
String 1:Hello World
```
  
 * Lets understand by example. Have a look at the following code:
 
 ```java
 class ImmutableInt {
  private final int value;

  public ImmutableInt(int i) {
    value = i;
  }

  public int getValue() {
    return value;
  }
}
 ```
 
 * As can be seen in the above example, the value of the ```ImmutableInt``` can only be set when the object is instantiated, and by having only a getter (```getValue()```) the object's state cannot be changed after instantiation. So ```ImmutableInt``` is an immutable class and its objects will be called immutable objects.
 * But it is important to understand that since the class does not have settter methods, it is not guaranteed to be immutable. 
 * getter methods, provide access to the reference of objects when they return values. So if the referenced object which is returned is not immutable itself, we provide the access to reference of the object. Changes can then be made to the object, loosing immutability.
 * So, we must take care that **all objects that are referenced by the object must be immutable as well**, or it could be possible to change the state of the object.
 * For example:
 
 ```java
 class NotQuiteImmutableList<T> {
  private final List<T> list;

  public NotQuiteImmutableList(List<T> list) {
    // creates a new ArrayList and keeps a reference to it.
    this.list = new ArrayList(list); 
  }

  public List<T> getList() {
    return list;
  }
}
 ```
 * The problem with the above code is, that the ```ArrayList``` can be obtained through ```getList``` and be manipulated, leading to the state of the object itself to be altered, therefore, not immutable. Like:
 
 ```java
  // notQuiteImmutableList contains "a", "b", "c"
  List<String> notQuiteImmutableList= new NotQuiteImmutableList(Arrays.asList("a", "b", "c"));
  // now the list contains "a", "b", "c", "d" -- this list is mutable.
  notQuiteImmutableList.getList().add("d");
 ```
 
 * One way to get around this problem is to return a copy of an ```array``` or ```Collection``` when called from a getter:
 
```java
public List<T> getList() {
  // return a copy of the list so the internal state cannot be altered
  return new ArrayList(list);
}
```
* Lets take another example:

```java
class Foo
{
     private final String myvar;

     public Foo(final String initialValue)
     {
         this.myvar = initialValue;
     }

     public String getValue()
     {
         return this.myvar;
     }
}
```

* Here, ```Foo``` doesn't have to worry that the caller to ```getValue()``` might change the text in the string.
* If you imagine a similar class to ```Foo```, but with a ```StringBuilder``` rather than a ```String``` as a member, you can see that a caller to ```getValue()``` would be able to alter the ```StringBuilder``` attribute of a ```Foo``` instance, which means we will not have an immutable object.

 
 ## Differences between final and immutability
  * final is a modifier which is used for class, method and variable also.  When a variable is declared with final keyword, it’s value can’t be modified, essentially, a constant.
  * **final ensures that the address of the object remains the same whereas the Immutable suggests that we can’t change the state of the object once created**
  * Lets put it this way: ```final``` simply makes the object reference unchangeable. The object it points to is not immutable by doing this. the *INSTANCE* can never refer to another object, but the object it refers to may change state.
  * final means that you can’t change the object’s reference to point to another reference or another object, **but you can still mutate its state (using setter methods)**. 
    Whereas immutable means that the object’s actual value can’t be changed, but you can change its reference to another one.
  * By declaring a reference variable as final, we **wont** get any immutability nature, Even though reference variable is final.
    But we cant perform reassignment for that variable but we can perform any type of change in the corresponding Object.
  * Lets take an example:
 
  ```java
  class Geeks {
    public static void main(String[] args)
    {
        final StringBuffer sb = new StringBuffer("Hello");
 
        // Even though reference varibale s1 is final
        // We can perform any changes
        sb.append("GFG");
 
        System.out.println(sb);
 
        // Here we will get Compile time error
        // Because reassignment is not possible for final variable
        sb = new StringBuffer("Hello World");
 
        System.out.println(sb);
    }
}
  ```
  
  * If you have a look at the above code, ```sb``` is a final variable, so you can not reassign a new value to ```sb```.
  * But ```sb```  has a reference of a memory location (which can't be changed as it is final). We can change the value stored at that memory location. So final is not immutable.
  

## How to make an object immutable

* Have a look at [this](https://javaranch.com/journal/2003/04/immutable.htm)
* In order to create an immutable class, you should follow the below steps:
   1. Make your class **```final```**, so that no other classes can extend it.
   2. Make all your fields **```final```**, so that they’re initialized only once inside the constructor and never modified afterward.
   3. Don’t expose setter methods.
   4. When exposing methods which modify the state of the class, you must always return a new instance of the class.
   5. If the class holds a mutable object:
      * Inside the constructor, make sure to use a clone copy of the passed argument and never set your mutable field to the real instance passed through constructor, this is to prevent the clients who pass the object from modifying it afterwards.
      * Make sure to always return a clone copy of the field and never return the real object instance from getters.
   
* Let us understand why making our class final is required to make out class immutable. Look at the example below:

```java
public class Immutable {
     private final int value;

     public Immutable(int value) {
         this.value = value;
     }

     public int getValue() {
         return value;
     }
}
```

* The class ```Immutable``` is an immutable class, except that it is not declared final. By not declaring the class ```final```, we will expose a seemingly immutable class to be actually mutable.Like:

```java
public class Mutable extends Immutable {
     private int realValue;

     public Mutable(int value) {
         super(value);

         realValue = value;
     }

     public int getValue() {
         return realValue;
     }
     public void setValue(int newValue) {
         realValue = newValue;
     }

    public static void main(String[] arg){
        Mutable obj = new Mutable(4);
        Immutable immObj = (Immutable)obj;              
        System.out.println(immObj.getValue());
        obj.setValue(8);
        System.out.println(immObj.getValue());
    }
}
```

OUTPUT:
```java
4
8
```
* Notice that in my ```Mutable``` subclass, I've overridden the behavior of ```getValue``` to read a new, mutable field declared in my subclass. As a result, your class, which initially looks immutable, really isn't immutable. I can pass this ```Mutable``` object wherever an ```Immutable``` object is expected, which could do Very Bad Things to code assuming the object is truly immutable. Marking the base class final prevents this from happening.

* Refer example [here](https://dzone.com/articles/how-to-create-an-immutable-class-in-java).
