## Contents
* [Singleton design pattern](#singleton-design-pattern)
* [Singleton classes in JAVA](#singleton-classes-in-java)
* [Implementing Singleton class](#implementing-singleton-class)
* [Thread Safety in singleton classes](#thread-safety-in-singleton-classes)
  * [Eager Initilization](#eager-initilization)
  * [synchronized Lazy Initialization](#synchronized-lazy-initilization)
  * [Double checked Locking design pattern](#double-checked-locking-design-pattern)
  * [Bill Pugh Singleton Implementation](#bill-pugh-singleton-implementation)

## Singleton design pattern
* Singleton design pattern is the
  * solution proposed to return same instance every time
  * restrict instantiation of a class more than once
  * exactly one copy is available at any given point of time
  * ensures only one instance is available in a Java Virtual Machine

## Singleton classes in JAVA
* A singleton class is a class that can have only one object (an instance of the class) at a time.After first time, we simply can not create the instance of a singleton class. 
* To design a singleton class:
  1. Override the constructor of the class and make it private (to avoid new object creation using new operator).
  2. Declare a private static instance of the same class
  3. Provide a public static method that will return the singleton class instance variable. If the variable is not initialized then initialize it or else simply return the instance variable.
  
### Implementing Singleton Class
```java
   // Java program implementing Singleton class with getInstance() method
class Singleton
{
    // static variable singleInstance of type Singleton
    private static Singleton singleInstance = null;
 
    // variable of type String
    public String s;
 
    // private constructor restricted to this class itself
    private Singleton()
    {
        s = "Hello I am a string part of Singleton class";
    }
 
    // static method to create instance of Singleton class
    public static Singleton getInstance()
    {
        if (singleInstance == null)
            singleInstance = new Singleton();
 
        return singleInstance;
    }
}
 
// Driver Class
class Main
{
    public static void main(String args[])
    {
        // instantiating Singleton class with variable x
        Singleton x = Singleton.getInstance();
 
        // instantiating Singleton class with variable y
        Singleton y = Singleton.getInstance();
 
        // instantiating Singleton class with variable z
        Singleton z = Singleton.getInstance();
 
        // changing variable of instance x
        x.s = (x.s).toUpperCase();
 
        System.out.println("String from x is " + x.s);
        System.out.println("String from y is " + y.s);
        System.out.println("String from z is " + z.s);
        System.out.println("\n");
 
        // changing variable of instance z
        z.s = (z.s).toLowerCase();
 
        System.out.println("String from x is " + x.s);
        System.out.println("String from y is " + y.s);
        System.out.println("String from z is " + z.s);
    }
}

  ```
*  Output
 ```
String from x is HELLO I AM A STRING PART OF SINGLETON CLASS
String from y is HELLO I AM A STRING PART OF SINGLETON CLASS
String from z is HELLO I AM A STRING PART OF SINGLETON CLASS


String from x is hello i am a string part of singleton class
String from y is hello i am a string part of singleton class
String from z is hello i am a string part of singleton class
 ```
 *  Explanation: In the ```Singleton``` class, when we first time call ```getInstance()``` method, it creates an object of the class with name ```singleInstance``` and return it to the variable. Since ```singleInstance``` is static, it is changed from null to some object. Next time, if we try to call ```getInstance()``` method, since ```singleInstance``` is not null, it is returned to the variable, instead of instantiating the ```Singleton``` class again. 
 
 * In the above code we are using **Lazy Initialization**. It is a technique where one postpones the instantiation of a object until its first use. In other words the instance of a class is created when its required to be used for the first time. The idea behind this is to avoid unnecessary instance creation. 
 
 * When the above code is executed in a multi threaded program the concern that immediately comes to the mind is the **"Race condition"**. Consider a scenario:
   * Thread A would check that ```singleInstance == null``` so it goes inside to create the instance but might go into ```Runnable``` status before it creates the ```Singleton``` instance.
   * Thread B also checks that ```singleInstance == null``` and it goes ahead, creates the instance and uses it for its operations.
   * Thread A comes back to running status and it also continues to create its own instance and start using it.

 
 ## Thread safety in Singleton classes
 
 * **```getInstance()``` method in singleton class is not thread safe.** Multiple threads can access it at the same time. Suppose two threads access the method at same time when the instance variable is not initialized, both of them will end up creating the instanceo of the class and our singleton implementation will end up broken.
 
 * There are three ways in which we can achieve thread safety in singleton classes.
 
 #### Eager Initilisation: 
 
 * **Create the instance variable at the time of class loading**. This is called eager initialization. Something like this:
 ```java
 public class EagerInitializedSingleton {
    
    private static final EagerInitializedSingleton instance = new EagerInitializedSingleton();
    
    //private constructor to avoid client applications to use constructor
    private EagerInitializedSingleton(){}

    public static EagerInitializedSingleton getInstance(){
        return instance;
    }
}
 ```
 * This code is easy to implement and it does provide thread safety. However, the above written code is very poor in terms of performance because we are doing early creation of resources that might not be used in the application.
 * Also,the client application can’t pass any argument, so we can’t reuse it. For example, having a generic singleton class for database connection where client application supplies database server properties.
 
 
 #### synchronized Lazy Initialization
 
 * To get rid of the above issue, we can use lazy initilization.
 * Remember,  Lazy initialization is a technique where one postpones the instantiation of a object until its first use. In other words the instance of a class is created when its required to be used for the first time. The idea behind this is to avoid unnecessary instance creation. 
 * To address the multithreading issue we can make the global access method ```getInstance()```  **synchronized**. 
 
 ```java
 public class ThreadSafeSingleton {

    private static ThreadSafeSingleton instance;
    
    private ThreadSafeSingleton(){}
    
    public static synchronized ThreadSafeSingleton getInstance(){
        if(instance == null){
            instance = new ThreadSafeSingleton();
        }
        return instance;
    }
    
}
 ```
 * This pattern works fine. Thread safety is guaranteed and clients can pass parameters as well.But its a huge performance overhead because everytime the method is invoked it has to go through the process of waiting for the lock and then obtaining the lock and its unnecessary because its only once that the instance is created and all subsequent invocations would just return that instance. This means **unnecessary synchronization that is not required once the instance variable is initialized.**
 
 * Instead of synchronized method, we can also use synchronized block but the Synchronization overhead on performance will still be there.
 
 * To conclude, we need to design singleton pattern in a such a way that once a singleton instance is created & available for use then no threads need to wait for the instance, they should get the singleton instance and continue with their execution.
 
 #### Double checked Locking design pattern
 
 *  In this approach, the synchronized block is used inside the if condition with an additional check to ensure that only one instance of singleton class is created.

```java
public class SingletonDesignPatternWithDCL {
 
    // Step 1: private static variable of INSTANCE variable
    private static volatile SingletonDesignPatternWithDCL INSTANCE;
 
    // Step 2: private constructor
    private SingletonDesignPatternWithDCL() {
 
    }
 
    // Step 3: Provide public static getInstance() method returning INSTANCE after checking
    public static SingletonDesignPatternWithDCL getInstance() {
 
        // double-checking lock
        if(null == INSTANCE){
 
            // synchronized block
            synchronized (SingletonDesignPatternWithDCL.class) {
                if(null == INSTANCE){
                    INSTANCE = new SingletonDesignPatternWithDCL();
                }
            }
        }
        return INSTANCE;
    }
}

```

 * With this approach
    * Thread safety is guaranteed
    * Client application can pass arguments
    * Lazy initialization achieved
    * Synchronization overhead is minimal and applicable only for first few threads when the variable is null.
    
 * However it is purely a design choice to see which pattern should be used. However, It is a design choice to choose from above listed approaches to begin with, as starting with double-checking lock in a non-threaded environment yields poor results 
 
 #### Bill Pugh Singleton Implementation
 *  Prior to Java5, memory model had a lot of issues and above methods caused failure in certain scenarios in multithreaded environment.
 * So, Bill Pugh suggested a concept of inner static classes to use for singleton:
 
 
 ```java
 // Java code for Bill Pugh Singleton Implementaion
public class GFG 
{
 
  private GFG() 
  {
    // private constructor
  }
 
  // Inner class to provide instance of class
  private static class BillPughSingleton
  {
    private static final GFG INSTANCE = new GFG();
  }
 
  public static GFG getInstance() 
  {
    return BillPughSingleton.INSTANCE;
  }
}

 ```
 
 * When the singleton class is loaded, inner class is not loaded and hence doesn’t create object when loading the class. Inner class is created only when getInstance() method is called. So it may seem like eager initialization but it is lazy initialization.
* This is the most widely used approach as it doesn’t use synchronization.
 
 
