As we talk about distributed storage, I'm gonna begin by setting the stage in the coffee shop and talking about non-distributed storage. A single master database of the kind that many software developers and architects are familiar with, that's ubiquitous in the work that we do. As we scale that coffee shop, we're gonna do different things to that storage system. You're gonna see a pattern, and you're gonna see this pattern throughout the whole course, that as we scale it seems like bad things happen to us. I will be occasionally emphasizing the negative things that happen, as a system becomes distributed. And there's an interesting insight there to remember, distributed systems are hard, and if you could possibly get away with not having one, with it being a single master, single computer solution, your life would be much, much better. However, as we'll see in the case of the coffee shop, that also means that the business doesn't expand, and maybe life is a little bit less awesome in other ways. So keep that in mind, we'll see bad things happen to us, but the assumption is we have some reason to wanna be distributed, and we'll need to remember that reason because of all the difficulty we'll face. Let's take a look at a Single-Master system. Here we have a database, which in this case is going to be a pad of paper. Imagine you have your favorite boutique coffee shop, or perhaps you're running a boutique coffee shop, and you want to be able to remember the names and favorite drinks of customers. Now names I guess you just have to remember them, you have to recognize them by face, and for a few people you might be able to keep track of whose favorite drink is whose. But, once you grow a little bit, you're gonna get a pad of paper, and you're just gonna write things down. I'd say I'll walk into the coffee shop, and I'm usually a pretty easy guy to please when it comes to coffee and I'll just say, "Hey, my favorite is an Americano." So write that down, Tim Americano, okay good, easy enough. Now when I come back in, good enough, the barista recognizes me, he says, "Oh you're Tim, "well, you want an Americano." Done, pull that out of the database. So that's very simple, that's one pad of paper. If I then change my favorite drink later on, it's no problem. The barista can just draw a line through that, or write a new line at the end of the pad, and write that new drink down if I say, "I don't want that Americano anymore. "Now my favorite drink is a triple skinny, two thirds decaff, half chocolate, no whip grande with extra foam, or something like that, that's okay. Easy to remember on that pad of paper. There's usually no complexity here at all, it just works. Now, lets see what happens when we turn the scale knob up a little bit, and we start to make this into a distributed system.
