
#### Coffee shop model: 
* Consider the coffee shop case, where the users come for buying coffee.
* Business wants to store the name of the customer and thier coffee preference, so that the next time they  come, we look at storage and make their prefered coffee.
* We do this as a key-value pair, i.e [customerName - coffeePreference] in a single machine.
  
### Read Replication
* The business is expanding,shop get lots and lots of customers and now the read traffic on our single server is increasing manifolds. So while the write traffic is not very high, repeat customers come to shop, and ask for thier faviorite coffee.
* This is where **Read Replication** is comes into play. It is the first strategy for scaling a classical single master database.
* It normally has following structure, where there is a leader server and multiple read servers. Following things are kept in mind:
  1. Whenever a new write request comes, the leader server writes the data unto itself.
  2. It then replicates the new data/updated data to other read servers. 
  3. Once the replication is done,the data can be accessed from any of the servers with consistent results.
   
#### Problems with read replication:
#####For Reads Not Writes

* Read replication only solves the problem when there are lots more reads than writes. This is a strategy that was developed early on in the history of the web. Because architects discovered that there were typically lots and lots more reads to web traffic than there were writes. So writes were a relatively easy problem to manage on a single server. So all we wanted to do was to replicate that read traffic to a number of follower nodes. But,if you have a write heavy workload read replication is not going to help you.
##### Consistency 

* In read replication the main server gets the write request and it has to propagate that to the read servers. Now this doesn't necessarily propagate at the same time. So while the replication is not complete, the read servers are not necessarily perfectly consistent with each other all the time. 
* This means a customer could go in to update his favorite drink, this is written at the leader server.It starts propagating the changes but before that happens the value of this customer's favorite drink is read from one of the read servers. This servers might not have the right favorite drink yet. So we have broken the  strong consistency guarantee. 
* Let us understand that this is not the end of the world. This is because if we  need a distributed database we probably are going to be willing to compromise with the eventual consistency of system. 
* That seems to be the judgment of most architects who build distributed storage systems - they don't really mind that. For as bad as it might sound the first time you hear it eventual consistency is something you're gonna live with. But you have to know that this is now a characteristic of the system. 
* In fact some of the tradtional relational databases and a NoSQL database like MongoDB, does replication in same way. As a relational developer we have this assumption that we have strong consistency. That's how we're trained to think about the database. sStrong consistency guarantee is something which matters a lot to us when we choose a database. But sometimes we won't have itand it's a little bit out of our control. So again we just have to know it, and design for it, and understand that sometimes you are goint to store your new favorite coffee and then place an order. And you are  not gonna get that new favorite coffee on that first order. Second time when you come in tomorrow it will be fine. But you just have to know that that consistency might take a few minutes to catch up.
